Translator: Kerlene Telesford
Reviewer: Ellen Maloney
Six years ago, I took a 600 kilometer trip
to meet someone who would change my life.
That person is my cousin José.
And we all fell in love with that smile.
But when he was two and a half,
something happened.
That smile disappeared.
He stopped learning new words,
he didn't look you in the eye,
and when you called to him,
he didn't pay attention.
We went to one doctor, then another,
and the diagnosis was autism.
You have a cousin
whom you love so much,
and he's diagnosed
with autism: What do you do?
Well, you do something.
On his third birthday,
I wrote the happy birthday
song in pictograms.
I arrived at my aunt's house and sang,
(Singing) "José, happy birthday to you,
Happy birthday, happy birthday,
happy birthday to you!"
What does José do?
He takes my piece of paper
and goes running to his mother,
singing her the birthday song.
And he goes running to his father
and sings him the birthday song.
And that was his way of showing us
that that's how he learned.
Time passed, and we wrote
the "José's Underpants" song.
A story for him about leaving diapers
behind and only using the toilet.
It worked very well with him.
And I'd been searching on the Internet
for material to use with him.
I didn't find any,
so I decided to share this.
I posted it on a blank blog,
just the story and a sentence
from the pictogram story
for leaving diapers behind
and only using the toilet.
And then they started to write to me.
Mothers, professionals
from every corner of the globe,
wrote to me to say,
"Thank you for sharing this material,
because we're also looking
for this kind of material
to use with our children."
Then I began to tell my story.
I went to the neighborhood fruit vendor
and told him what happened
and told my colleagues
from school, and my friends.
And then people began to join me.
And they said, "This dream that you have,
of writing stories
and making them available
to everyone who needs them,
we're joining it."
And then came the first illustrator
who said she would
illustrate the stories,
and the first companies
that joined, with their professionals.
And the first anonymous person
who posted about us
telling our story on their blog.
And so, little by little,
what was once a dream
transformed into reality.
I had been working
in Switzerland for a year.
And during that year,
before making the decision
to tell that story, was a process.
I had to decide
that I wanted to do this.
I thought about it and said:
"There are a lot of families,
a lot of professionals who need this:
there truly is a social demand for it."
And sometimes I'd daydream and say,
"And what if I do create this material,
and put it in the hands
of everyone who needs it?"
And one day, shortly before returning
to Spain, I took the first step and said,
"I'm going to believe in my dreams
and I'm going to do it."
And I still don't know how,
but I had decided
that I was going to do it.
As I began to tell my story,
people began to join me
and the project started to grow.
In the meantime, I continued
as an architecture student.
And I had to complete
my graduation project.
So the graduation project
consists, basically,
of designing a building, performing
the structural and system calculations,
and taking, on average,
one year to build it.
It was at that time
that I discovered how exciting
it was to work on something you liked,
because for me,
that idea of collaborating,
albeit just a little,
so that those 67 million
autistic children around the world
could develop their potential
a little more,
was something indescribable.
And I rejected the idea
of spending the next year of my life
completing a very pretty
graduation project
that the professors would really like,
but would only serve to gain me a degree.
So I decided to look for someone
who needed something.
I started contacting autism organizations.
I started by calling an NGO in India.
All of this under enormous pressure
called parents, and they're telling you,
"Finish your major already!"
When months had already passed,
and I believed I wouldn't reach my goal,
I found a pharmaceutical
company in Seville
that was undertaking an initiative
to declare African music
an immaterial patrimony of humanity.
And among other things,
one of the things it was doing
was the construction
of a traditional music
and dance hall
in Burkina Faso,in Africa.
So I spoke with the architect
and that idea seemed
pretty good to him, using
that entire year of work
that I had to do anyway;
to learn, complete my degree,
finish my training,
and that it would have a positive impact
on other people, on others.
I began designing the project
and, of course, realized
that I had a lot of questions.
Because I knew what it was like here,
but what was it like there?
I didn't know.
I started researching
their cultures, their customs.
And I was designing it, but I said,
"This is what I think they need,
not necessarily what they need."
So I went there.
I got together with them,
sat down at a table
with the king's musician,
the Minister of Culture,
the local association
undertaking the project.
I began listening to them,
because that's cooperation, right?
I learn from you, you learn from me,
and we do something together.
Then, I returned to Spain,
with a lot of answers.
I designed the project: it was going
to be a project with three rooms,
a central plaza, and we'd do it
with local materials.
We were going to take
the same land from the site
to make some pressed bricks,
with which we would be
constructing the building.
We were going to construct it differently.
I had been taught that you call
a builder and he builds it.
But there, we did it
with a technical school,
where 20 young people, boys and girls,
at risk of social exclusion,
were learning a trade
while we constructed the building.
It also had to give true
economic sustainability to the project,
because when I had been there,
I saw there were many
cooperative projects,
that came, did something, but afterwards,
they didn't think about continuity.
So abandoned projects remained.
Each building was designed
for it to function.
Inside, it would generate activity
that created employment.
That would give economic sustainability
to its own local community.
And then, you realize you're not only
designing a building.
You're learning a whole lot more
than what you initially went to learn.
I won a scholarship.
And I went, after earning my degree,
to construct this building.
And there I was, fighting in half-French
with the construction workers.
I've never learned more in my entire life.
Moreover, you realize
that what you're doing
has a very positive impact on others,
but that it comes back around.
You realize that by giving, you receive.
And you receive much more
than what you've given.
You get there and it's the workshop,
the first to train boys and girls
that are learning how to dance,
and see their faces able to tell you
what they have learned.
And you arrive here and go
to José's birthday party,
who is now six years old
and is smiling and happy again.
And you say, "What is distance?
What is the true distance
between what I have to do,
because it's my profession,
I have to educate myself,
or it's useful for my personal
or professional development,
and for that to have
a positive impact on us?
On others, in society?"
I think that you only have to take
the first step, to say I'm going to do it,
and then, then we'll think about how.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)